The Veliger 304)408-41 1 (April 1, 1<
THE VELIGER
CMS, Inc, 1988
Two New Species of Liotiinae (Gastropoda: Turbinidae)
from the Philippine Islands
by
JAMES H. MCLEAN
Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History, 900 Exposition Boulevard, Los Angeles, California 90007, U.S.A.
Abstract.
Two new gastropods of the turbinid subfamily Liotiinae are described: Bathyliotina glassi and Pseudoliotina springsteeni.
Both species have been collected recently in tangle nets off the Philippine Islands.
INTRODUCTION
A number of new or previously rare species have been taken in recent years by shell fishermen using tangle nets in the Philippine Islands, particularly in the Bohol Strait between Cebu and Bohol.
Specimens of the same two new species in the turbinid subfamily Liotiinae have been received from Charles Glass of Santa Barbara, California, and Jim Springsteen of Melbourne, Australia.
Because these species are now appearing in Philippine collections, they are described prior to completion of a world-wide review of the subfamily, for which I have been gathering materials and examining type specimens in various museums.
Two other species, Liotina peron (Kiener, 1839) and Dentarene loculosa (Gould, 1859), also have been taken by tangle nets in the Bohol Strait but are not treated here.
Much of the material coming from Philippine tangle net sources comes from either of two localities: off Punta Engano, Mactan Island, Cebu (1018N, 12401E) and off Balicasag Island, S of Panglao, Bohol (931N, 12340E).
These localities are at opposite ends of the Bohol Strait and are separated by a distance of approximately 100 km.
Precise locality information for material from Philippine tangle nets is impossible to obtain, because the shell fishermen work the entire area and do not provide detailed localities (Jim Springsteen, personal communication).
The type localities of the two species described here are given simply as the Bohol Strait.
Maximum depth for the Bohol Strait is indicated as 190 fathoms on U.S.
Hydrographic Chart no.
14429, from which the coordinates cited above were taken.
After conversion to metres, the depth range is therefore approximately 200-350 m for this material.
Holotypes are deposited in the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History (LAM); additional para-types are deposited in the LACK, the U.S.
National Museum of Natural History, Washington (USNM), and the Australian Museum, Sydney (AMS).
Additional material in less perfect condition of the first described species has been recognized in the collections of the USNM and the Museum National dhistoire Naturelle, Paris (MNHN).
Family Turbinidae Rafinesque, 1815 Subfamily Liotiinae H. & A. Adams, 1854
The subfamily is characterized by a turbiniform profile, nacreous interior, fine lamellar sculpture, an intritacalx in most genera, circular aperture, a multispiral operculum with calcareous beads, and a radula like that of other turbinid subfamilies.
Although previously treated by some authors as a full family, the Liotiinae have recently been ranked as a subfamily of Turbinidae (Mclean, 1987).
Genus Bathyhotina Habe, 1961
Type species (original designation): Liotia armata A. Adams, 1861.
Recent, Korea Strait.
Bathyliotina species are characterized by a broad umbilical opening, a spinose periphery, and greatly thickened final lip in which the aperture flares to its greatest extent, followed by deposition of lamellar layers that evenly decrease the diameter of the aperture to its final size.
Bathyliotina is unique among liotiine genera in having the evenly decreasing lamellar layers forming the final expanded lip.
Liotina Fischer, 1885, Dentarene Iredale, 1929, and Austroliotia Cotton, 1948, differ from Bathyliotina in having a greatly expanded lip followed by a constriction and then a secondary inflation to the final lip only slightly larger
